---
layout: post
title: Notes on Coleman-Weinberg Potential
subtitle: 
date: 2024-03-25
author: Baiyang Zhang
header-img: img/mathArt8.jpg
catalog: true
tags:
  - colemanWeinbergPotential
  - effectiveTheory
  - coleman
  - effectivePotential
---

### Quantum Effective Action

The goal of this chapter is to introduce the quantum action and quantum potential. There are (at least) two kinds of quantum actions, one is the `Wilsonian quantum action`, where the higher momentum modes are integrated out to focus on the low-energy, long-distance behavior of a system. It embodies the effective interactions of a quantum system a*t a certain scale*, accounting for the influence of fluctuations at smaller scales. This potential is central to understanding how physical phenomena emerge at different length scales from the underlying quantum fields, particularly in the study of critical phenomena and phase transitions. Take a scalar field theory $\phi$ for example. The "integrating out" procedure is done using the path integral approach, it involves *separating the field into high and low energy parts*. To be more specific, the scalar field is split into $\phi = \phi_ {\text{low}} + \phi_ {\text{high}}$, where $\phi_ {\text{low}}$ contains modes below a certain energy scale $\Lambda$ and $\phi_ {\text{high}}$ contains modes above $\Lambda$. $\phi_ {\text{high}}$ can be thought of as a thin shell in the momentum space. The path integral over the full field is then re-written as a path integral over these two components of fields. The crucial step is to integrate out the high-energy modes $\phi_ {\text{high}}$. This can be done perturbatively by treating $\phi_ {\text{high}}$ as a different field from $\phi_ {\text{low}}$, using Feynman diagram techniques. The resulting effective action should only depends on the low-energy modes. The Wilsonian effective action captures the dynamics of the field *at energies below* $\Lambda$. It will typically have a form different from the original action, often with new interactions generated as a result of integrating out the high-energy modes. New scale could even emerge, as in the case of dimensional transmutation, which we will not talk too much about in this note.

The other kind of effective action is the so-called `quantum effective actions` which is the Legendre transformation of the generating functional of connected diagrams. It is quite a mouthful and we will talk more about it in the next section. When the original action is replaced by the quantum effective action, the tree-level diagrams generated by it will contain *all the quantum corrections* of the full theory (i.e. the original theory). The quantum effective action has a useful property that it can give us the vacuum expectation value (VEV) of the field operator with quantum correction. As we will see, the `Coleman-Weinberg potential` is a special case of the effective action.

- - -

There are in general three ways to calculate the effective action, as listed in the following.

- **Matching**. We require

$$\int \mathcal{D}\{\text{original dof}\} e^{iS}
    = \int \mathcal{D}\{\text{effective dof}\} e^{i\Gamma}
$$

where dof stands for the `degrees of freedom`, the LHS is the original theory while the RHS is the effective theory, with different degree of freedom. For example, QCD (at high energy) has quark and gluon as the degrees of freedom, when the energy is lowered the degrees of freedom becomes color singlet particles. $\Gamma$ is the quantum action.

- **Legendre transformation**, as we will show shortly.

- **Background field method**, that is to separate the field into a static non-propagating background field $\phi_ b$ and a dynamic propagating field $\tilde{\phi}$, the dynamic fields are the fluctuations around the background field. Integrating out the fluctuations (usually done perturbatively) leaves us the effective potential $\Gamma[\phi_ b]$,

$$
\int \mathcal{D} \phi e^{i S[\phi_ b + \tilde{\phi}]}
= e^{i\Gamma[\phi_ b]}.
$$

The background field method is also closely related to how we calculate quantum corrections to classical solitonic solutions, such as the quantum correction to kink mass. 

The first try, before all the three mentioned above, is usually an educated guess. Given that **the effective action must possess the same symmetries as the original action**, one can propose various *local terms* that fulfill this requirement. The coefficients of these terms are then adjusted based on experimental data. This method relies on symmetry considerations to guide the formulation of acceptable terms in the effective action.

For the rest of the note, we will confine our discussion to $\phi^4$ model with real scalar fields.

### Quantum Action

To keep the notation simple, consider a single real scalar field $\phi$, with possibly mass term and self interaction. The partition function (with source) reads

$$
 Z[J] = \int \mathcal{D} \phi e^{iS[\phi] + i\int \phi J},
$$

where $S$ is the action, $J$ is the source, $\int \phi J$ is short for $\int_ {M} \phi(x) J(x)$. $\phi$ is integrated out hence $Z$ is a functional of $J$ only.

From it we define the generating function $W[J]$ by

$$
  Z[J] = e^{iW[J]} \implies W[J] = -i \ln Z[J],
$$

$W[J]$ is the summation of *connected diagrams* with source, connected roughly because if you consider all the diagrams, the disconnected but replica-forming (namely the disconnected diagrams formed by putting two or more replicas of the same diagrams together) diagrams can be arranged into forms of $\bullet^{n}/n!$, where $\bullet$ is (the expression of) some connected diagram. Then we can organized them into an exponential function $e^{ \bullet }$, now $\bullet$ contains information only about connected diagrams. For more details, please refer to Mark Srednicki's text book on quantum field theory. To repeat, $W[J]$ generates *connected diagrams* only.

- - -

The expectation value of $\phi$ in the presence of a source $J$ is given by

$$
 \left\langle {\phi} \right\rangle_ J=\frac{1}{Z} \int \mathcal{D} \phi e^{iS[\phi] + i\int \phi J} \phi
 = \frac{\delta W[J]}{\delta J(x)}\equiv \varphi_ {J},
$$

Note the difference between $\phi$ and the so-called "varphi" $\varphi$, the former is an operator while the latter is a classical field. The subscript $J$ in $\varphi_ {J}$ is to emphasize that the vev of $\phi$ depends on the source $J$. In comparison to classical mechanics of point particles, $W$ is like Lagrangian $L$, $J$ is like $\dot{q}$, and $\delta W / \delta J$ is like $\partial L / \partial \dot{q}$, which introduces a new variable. 

Since the generating functional $W[J]$ is a functional of $J$, we can perform Legendre transform to define a new functional in terms of $\delta W / \delta J =: \varphi_ {J}$. The result is the quantum action:

$$
\boxed{
  \Gamma[\varphi_ {J}] = W[J] - \int J\varphi_ {J}
,  }
$$

which is indeed a functional of $\varphi_ {J}$ and not $J$, since it is independent of variation $\delta J$ of $J$, as the readers can verify. Again we have omitted the measure under the integral sign. Some direct calculation shows that 

$$
  \frac{\delta\Gamma[\varphi_ {J}]}{\delta\varphi_ {J}(x)} = -J(x).
$$

It is not supposed to be obvious, but the effective action $\Gamma$ is the generating functional for 1-particle irreducible (1PI) diagrams! The significance of 1PI diagrams is best explained by Coleman in his lecture note on QFT, which I quote:

>If we treat the 1PI graphs as giving us effective interaction vertices, then to find the full Green’s functions we only have to sum up tree graphs, never any loops, because all the loops have been stuffed inside the definition of the propagators and the 1PI graphs. This marvelous property of the 1PI graphs is important. Taking the 1PI graph generating functional for a quantum action enables us to turn the combinatorics of building up full Green’s functions from 1PI Green’s functions into an analytic statement, and we end up with the correct expressions for the full Green’s functions. We’re turning a topological statement of one-particle irreducibility into an analytic statement that we will find easy to handle.

To see that $\Gamma[\varphi]$ indeed generates the 1PI diagrams, it is easiest (for myself) to inverse the chain of reasoning, first we define an effective action such that its tree level diagrams reproduces the quantum result (which is easier than it looks), then show that such constructed action satisfies the same equation as $\Gamma[\phi_ {J}]$, so they are the same (up to some insignificant constant, such as the normalization constant). We will proceed in this direction.

For now, forget about $\varphi_ {J}$. Let's starting from defining the an effective action $\Gamma[\phi_ {c}]$, which is a functional of of some classical field $\phi_ {c}$. The role of $\phi_ {c}$ in $\Gamma[\phi_ {c}]$ is the same as the role of $\phi$ in the classical action $S[\phi]$, where we usually don't bother to emphasize that $\phi$ is classical rather than a quantum field, but here we do. $\Gamma[\phi_ {c}]$ is defined such that, if we treat $\Gamma[\phi_ {c}]$ as the classical action $S[\phi]$, substitute $\Gamma$ with $S$ in the path integral, and calculate $Z[J]$ (or equivalently $W[J]$), using **only the tree diagrams**, then we get exact $Z[J]$ with every bit of the quantum correction! At first glance, this might seem almost too convenient, making our calculations significantly simpler, too good to be true. However, there's no shortcut to the truth; ultimately, we still need to buckle down and work through the loop diagrams. Essentially, the effective action is a clever reorganization of the contributions from these loop diagrams. Even though the effective action doesn't simplify the calculations per se, it is still quite valuable to us since it provides a new perspective, serving as a powerful tool in quantum field theory, enabling the study of quantum phenomena with a formalism that extends the classical action to include quantum effects.

So how should $\Gamma[\phi_ {c}]$ be constructed? For any function $\phi_ {c}$, the effective action $\Gamma[\phi_ {c}]$ has a functional Taylor expansion:

$$
i\Gamma[\phi_ {c}] = \sum_ {n} \frac{1}{n!} \int d^{d}x_ {1}\cdots d^{d}x_ {n} \,  \Gamma^{(n)} (x_ {1},\cdots ,x_ {n}) \phi_ {c}(x_ {1})\cdots \phi_ {c}(x_ {n}).
$$

For example, if $\Gamma[\phi_ {c}] = \int  \, \phi_ {c}^{2}$, then the only non-zero component in the functional Taylor expansion is $\Gamma^{(2)}(x_ {1},x_ {2}) = 2\delta^{d}(x_ {1}-x_ {2})$. 

When talking about Feynman diagrams, it is more convenient to go to momentum representation, hence we define a modified version of the Fourier transform of $\Gamma^{(n)}$, such that

$$
\Gamma^{(n)}(x_ {1},\cdots x_ {n}) := \int \frac{dp_ {1}}{(2\pi)^{d}}\cdots  \frac{dp_ {n}}{(2\pi)^{d}}\,  \tilde{\Gamma}^{(n)} (p_ {1},\cdots ,p_ {n} ) (2\pi)^{d}\delta^{d}(p_ {1}+\cdots +p_ {n} ) .
$$

This definition contains extra $\delta$-function for future convenience. 

Recall that the filed $\phi_ {c}(x_ {i})$ themselves in the action eventually becomes **amputated** external legs, amputated in the sense that no propagator is associated to it. All the information is contained in $\tilde{\Gamma}$! We can brutally stuff all the 1PI diagrams, including loop corrections from $S[\phi]$, into $\tilde{\Gamma}$ so that we only need to take into consider the tree diagrams of $\Gamma$. For example, we can draw all the 1PI diagrams with three external legs, calculate them, and define it to be $\tilde{\Gamma}^{(3)}$. If we regard $\Gamma[\phi_ {c}]$ as a machine that takes a function $\phi_ {c}$ as input and spits out a number, then $\tilde{\Gamma}$'s are like its components.

To summarize, for $n\geq 2$, the $\tilde{\Gamma}^{(n)}$ are **defined** by the sum of 1PI diagrams with $n$ external legs. As usual the external legs are amputated.  The external momenta need not be conserved, that point is taken care of by the $\delta$-function in the definition of $\tilde{\Gamma}$. For $n=2$ the case is slightly more complicated, we need to include a propagator into the definition, but the philosophy is the same. 

Next we combine the tree-level exactness of $\Gamma[\phi_ {c}]$ with another concept: loop expansion. Loop expansion is equivalent to both semi-classical expansion (expansion in $\hbar$) and perturbative expansion (expansion in coupling $g$), should the right $\hbar$-dependence be made. Sidney Coleman thinks that $\hbar$ expansion is rubbish for two reasons (that I know of), 1) $\hbar$ is dimensional, with dimension of energy multiplies time, therefore is not a good expanding parameter and 2) if we make $\hbar$ dimensionless like we did with natural units, we could always change the units such that $\hbar=1$. In loop expansion, the tree level diagrams dominates the partition function $Z[J]$ when $\hbar$ is small, and becomes exact at $\hbar\to 0$. I am tempted to write

$$
\text{tree diagrams} = \lim_ { \hbar \to 0 } \int \mathcal{D}\phi_ {c} \, \exp \left\lbrace \frac{i}{\hbar}\Gamma[\phi_ {c}] + \int J\phi_ {c}   \right\rbrace  
$$


And this turns out to be correct. I used to think of $\phi_ {c}$ as some pre-determined classical function, which has caused me a lot of confusion. From now on let's get rid of the subscript $c$ in $\phi_ {c}$, since fields appear under the path integral are always classical field. We will put the subscript back when possible confusion could rise. 

Thanks to the $\hbar\to 0$ limit, the path-integral can be worked out using the method of stationary phase, up to some normalization constant we have 

$$
\lim_ { \hbar \to 0 } \int \mathcal{D}\phi \, \exp \left\lbrace \frac{i}{\hbar}\Gamma[\phi] + \int J\phi   \right\rbrace   = \exp \left\lbrace \frac{i}{\hbar}\Gamma[\overline{\phi}]+\int \, J\overline{\phi}  \right\rbrace ,
$$






- - -

**Summary.**

- $\Gamma[\varphi]$ generates the 1PI diagrams;
- $W[J]$ generates connected diagrams;
- $Z[J]$ generates all kinds of diagrams.

- - -

There are superficially two different ways to define the quantum effective action, 1) by requiring that the tree diagrams of the effective action reproduce the quantum effects of the original action, and 2) by Legendre transformation. It is not meant to be obvious, but they are equivalent to each other. To see it, we can first **define** $\Gamma[\phi]$ to be whose tree diagrams gives us all the quantum effects, then since $iW[J]$ also gives all the quantum effects with loops, we have

$$
e^{iW[J]} = \lim_ {\hbar\to 0} \int \mathcal{D}\phi e^{i\Gamma[\phi]/\hbar}
$$

where the limiting process isolates out the tree contribution, then use the fastest descent approximation we find $\Gamma$ can be written as the Legendre transformation of $W[J]$.

To see that $\Gamma$ generates only the 1PI diagrams, recall that quantum effective action has the property that the tree-level graphs generated by it gives the complete scattering amplitude. Putting $\Gamma[\varphi]$ at the position of action $S$, we will have a new path integral

$$
  Z_ \Gamma[J] = \int \mathcal{D}\phi e^{i\Gamma +i\int \phi J}.
$$

It will generate Feynman diagrams with sources, just like the original action $S$ does, only this time the tree diagrams alone is enough to give the complete information of the original theory. Thus $\Gamma$ must gives us exact propagators and exact $n$-point vertices, while the original action $S$ gives us the ordinary propagator and ordinary vertex. Also in order to calculate the exact n-point vertex, we need not consider the 1-particle reducible diagrams since any contribution from connected diagram can be written as a tree diagram comprised of two or more sub 1 particle IRREDUCIBLE diagrams.

**Remark.** The generating functionals such as $W[J]$ and $\Gamma[\varphi]$ are classical. In fact, the language of path integral has a feeling of classical field theory, in the sense that each path we take into consideration is a c-field in space-time, instead of q-field.

#### Tree-level Example

In the classical limit, taking the limit $\hbar \to 0$, the partition function become

$$
  Z = \int \mathcal{D}\phi e^{iS + i\int \phi J}
$$

which receives dominant contribution from the stationary configuration, given by

$$
  \frac{\delta}{\delta\phi}\left( S + \int \phi J \right) = 0
  \implies \frac{\delta S}{\delta\phi} = - J
$$

which has a solution $\varphi$. Thus the partition function is

$$
  Z = e^{iS+i\int \varphi J}
$$

up to a normalization factor. Since

$$
  W[J] = -i \ln Z = S + \int \varphi J,
$$

we have

$$
\varphi = \frac{\delta W}{\delta J} = \left\langle {\phi}_ J \right\rangle
$$

thus

$$
  \Gamma[\varphi] = W - \int \varphi J = S[\varphi].
$$

At the tree-level, the quantum effective action and the original action are the same.

### Effective Potential

In the classical dynamics, the vacuum (lowest energy state) configuration of the system is given by the minimum of the potential. In the quantum theory, we are sometimes interested in the vacuum expectation value (VEV) of the field operator $\phi$. In a quantum field theory, there is also have a potential term whose minimum gives the classical vacuum field configuration, however that's not the full story, since in a quantum theory the field always fluctuates around the vacuum, giving rise to a correction to $\left\langle \phi \right\rangle$.

We want a quantum effective potential which works like the classical potential, in the sense that its minimum corresponds to the field configuration of the vacuum, quantum corrections included. Luckily we already have something like that, i.e. the quantum effective action.

Recall that the quantum effective action

- is a functional of $\varphi$, and $\varphi = \left\langle {\phi}_ J \right\rangle$, meaning $\varphi$ is the expectation value of $\phi$ in the presence of a source term $J$, and
- satisfies ${\delta \Gamma}/{\delta \varphi} = J$
thus
- when $J=0$, the solution to ${\delta \Gamma}/{\delta \varphi} = J$ is the vev of $\phi$.

Furthermore, assume that the vacuum has translation symmetry, meaning $\left\langle \phi \right\rangle$ is a constant in space and time, then we just need one number to denote the field configuration, we can define a function $\mathcal{V} _ {\text{eff}}$ whose minimum is the vev of $\phi$,

$$
  \Gamma[\varphi]|_ {\varphi = \text{const}} = -VT \mathcal{V}_ {\text{eff}}(\varphi)
$$

where $V$ is the volume of the space and $T$ the extension of time, $\mathcal{V} _ {\text{eff}}(\varphi)$ is the quantum effective potential. We can see that $\mathcal{V} _ {\text{eff}}$ is a intensive quantity while $\Gamma$ is a extensive quantity, and ${\partial\mathcal{V}}/{\partial\phi} = 0$ reproduces ${\delta \Gamma}/{\delta \varphi} = 0$.

## Coleman-Weinberg Potential

### Background Fields

The method of background method is very useful for calculating beta functions and effective action. For a real scalar field $\phi$, the general idea is as following

- separate the field into the static background field $\phi_ b$ and dynamic field $\phi$, $\phi \to \phi_ b + \phi$. By static we mean it is not path-integrated, thus don't propagate. It will simplify the calculation a lot.
- Define the corresponding action with background field $S_ b[\phi_ b;\phi]$, and resulting generating functional $W_ b[\phi_ b;\phi]$, and the effective action $\Gamma_ b[\phi_ b;\varphi]$, where $\varphi$ is defined to be the vev of $\phi$ in the presence of the background field $\phi_ b$.
- $\Gamma_ b[\phi_ b;\varphi]$ has the useful property that
- 
$$
\Gamma_ b[\phi_ b=\phi;0] = \Gamma_ b[\phi_ b=0;\varphi] = \Gamma[\varphi].
$$

The first term means that the effective action with background field $\phi_ b = \phi$ and zero dynamic field $\varphi = 0$. Since the dynamic field will be set to zero at last, if a diagram has dynamic field external legs, it is also zero. It is  similar to the Feynman diagrams with sources, when we set $J=0$ in the end then all the diagrams with a un-canceled source vanish.


The reason why $\phi_ b$ does not propagate can be seen in two ways, namely in the context of canonical quantization and path integral.

**Canonical:**  the background field $\phi_ b$ is regarded as a classical field, it is not quantized thus there is no such thing as $\phi_ b$ propagator,
**Path integral:** $\phi_ b$ don't fluctuate, means it is left out of the path integral, recall how we came to the propagator in the first place, it means $\phi_ b$ don't propagate.


The action with a background field is defined as

$$
  S_ b[\phi_ b;\phi] = \int d^4x\mathcal{L}(\phi_ b+\phi),
$$

the partition function with source is

$$
  \mathcal{Z}[\phi_ b;J] = \int \mathcal{D}\phi \exp\{ i S_ b[\phi_ b;\phi]+i\int J\phi \} = \mathcal{Z}[J] e^{-i\int J\phi_ b},
$$

note that the source only couples to the dynamic field. Since $\phi$ is integrated over, $\mathcal{Z}$ can only be a functional of $\phi_ b, J$. Define the generating function as

$$
  W_ b[\phi_ b;J] \equiv -i \ln \mathcal{Z}_ b[\phi_ b;J] \implies W_b[\phi_ b;J] = W[J] - \int J\phi.
$$

Define

$$
  \varphi_ b(x) = \frac{\delta W_ b[J]}{\delta J(x)}
$$

we have

$$
  \varphi_ b = \varphi - \phi_ b
$$

which means that in the presence of a background field, $\left\langle \phi \right\rangle$ will be shifted by $\phi_ b$, which is kind of natural.

Now we need to define the effective action in the presence of a background field, by the means of Legendre transformation again.

$$
  \Gamma_ b [\phi_ b;\varphi_ b] = W_ b - \int \frac{\delta W_ b[J]}{\delta J}J = W_ b - \int \varphi_ b J
$$

you can check that

$$
\frac{\delta \Gamma_ b[\phi_ b;\varphi_ b]}{\delta\varphi_ b}= J .
$$

Replace $W_ b[J]$ with its expression in terms of $W[J]$, we can check that

$$
  \Gamma_ b[\phi_ b;\varphi_ b] = W[J] - \int J (\varphi_ b+\phi_ b) = \Gamma[\phi_ b + \varphi_ b]
$$

so for example if we want to calculate $\Gamma[\eta(x)]$, we can set $\phi_ b = \eta,\,\varphi = 0$ and use that to simplify calculations.

### Coleman-Weinberg Potential

Consider the real scalar Lagrangian

$$
\mathcal{L} = -\frac{1}{2} \phi \partial^2\phi - \frac{1}{2} m^2\phi^2-\frac{1}{4!}\phi^4
$$

the question is, when $m = 0$, will the quantum effects modify the shape of the potential?

Introduce a background field $\phi \to \phi_ b +\phi$, take it into the action and expand, keep in mind that the path integral is over field $\phi$ only, we have

$$
\begin{align*}
  e^{i\Gamma[\phi_ b]} &= e^{i\int d^4 x (-\frac{1}{2} \phi_ b \partial^2 \phi_ b-V(\phi_ b))} \\ \\
&\times\int \mathcal{D}\phi e^{i \int d^4 x (-\frac{1}{2} \phi \partial^2 \phi  -V(\phi_ b) - \phi V'(\phi_ b)-\frac{1}{2}V''[\phi_ b]\phi^2-\frac{1}{3!}V'''[\phi_ b]\phi^3-\cdots)}.
\end{align*}
$$

In the path integral, one of the terms in the Lagrangian, i.e. $\int \mathcal{D} \phi e^{i\phi V'}$ can be thrown away because we only need to consider 1PI diagrams in the calculation of $\Gamma$, while the Feynman diagram given by $\phi V'(\phi_ b)$ will never contribute to the 1PI diagrams. For the same reason we can also discard $\phi^3$ term in the Lagrangian. At one loop, there will be no contributions from $\phi^4$ and higher terms either. Hence we are left with

$$
  e^{i\Gamma[\phi_ b]} = e^{i\int d^4 x (-\frac{1}{2} \phi_ b \partial^2 \phi_ b-V(\phi_ b))} \int \mathcal{D} e^{i \int d^4 x (-\frac{1}{2} \phi \partial^2 \phi -\frac{1}{2}V''[\phi_ b]\phi^2)}.
$$

use the master formulae in QFT

$$
  \int\mathcal{D}\phi\exp\left\{ i \int d^4x (\phi M \phi) \right\} = \mathcal{N}\frac{1}{\text{det}^{ {1/2} }{M}}
$$

we have

$$
   e^{i\Gamma[\phi_ b]} = \mathcal{N}e^{i\int d^4 x (-\frac{1}{2} \phi_ b \partial^2 \phi_ b-V(\phi_ b))}
   \text{det}^{-1/2}(\partial^2 + V''(\phi_ b))
$$

In order to calculate the functional determinant, we need to put it in a specific representation, such as the position representation or the momentum representation, to turn $\partial^2 + V''(\phi_ b)$ into a matrix, then calculate the determinant of that infinite dimensional matrix. Writing

$$
 \Gamma[\phi_ b] =  \int d^4 x (-\frac{1}{2} \phi_ b \partial^2 \phi_ b-V(\phi_ b)) + \Delta \Gamma[\phi_ b],
$$

where

$$
  i\Delta \Gamma[\phi_ b] = -\frac{1}{2}\ln \det (\partial^2 +V''(\phi_ b)) + \text{const}.
$$

With the help of identity

$$
\ln \det M = \ln \prod_ i \lambda_ i = \sum_ i \ln \lambda_ i = \text{tr } {\ln M}
$$

where $\lambda_ i$ are the eigenvalues of $M$, we have

$$
  i\Delta \Gamma[\phi_ b] = -\frac{1}{2} \text{tr } {\ln (\partial^2 +V''(\phi_ b))} + \text{const}.
$$

Next we assume that $\phi_ b$ is a const in space-time, and define

$$
  m_ {\text{eff}}^2(\phi_ b) \equiv  V''(\phi_ b),
$$

calculate the functional determinant in the representation of $x$, with the help of

$$
\mathbb{1}= \int \frac{dp^4}{(2\pi)^4}  \left\lvert k \right\rangle  \left\langle{k}\right\rvert  
$$

we have

$$
\begin{align*}
  i\Delta \Gamma[\phi_ b] &= -\frac{1}{2}\int d^4 x \left\langle{x}\right\rvert  \ln\left( 1+\frac{V''}{\partial^2} \right) \left\lvert{x}\right\rangle  +\text{const}\\
  &= -\frac{1}{2}\int d^4 x \int\frac{d^4 k}{(2\pi)^4}\ln\left( 1-\frac{m_ {\text{eff}}^2}{k^2} \right)+\text{const}
\end{align*}
$$

where $\int d^4 x = VT$ is the space-time volume of the system.

The integral over momentum is divergent, we will render it finite by a hard cut-off, that is to Wick rotate the system into Euclidean space and insert the momentum cut-off $\Lambda$, yielding

$$
\begin{align*}
  \Delta\Gamma[\phi_ b] &= -VT \frac{2\pi^2}{2(2\pi)^4} \int_ 0^\Lambda dk_ E k_ E^3 \ln(1+\frac{m_ {\text{eff}}^2}{k_ E3^2}) +\text{const}\\
  &= -  \frac{VT}{128\pi^2} \left( 2 m_ {\text{eff}}^2 \Lambda^2 + 2m_ {\text{eff}}^4 \ln\frac{m_ {\text{eff}}^2}{\Lambda^2}+\text{const}\right)
\end{align*}
$$

where $k_ E$ is the Wick-rotated momentum and we have used the relation $\Lambda \gg m_ {\text{eff}}$. The effective potential accordingly is

$$
 V_ {\text{eff}} = V(\phi_ b) + c_ 1 + c_ 2 m_ {\text{eff}}^2 + \frac{1}{64\pi^2} m_ {\text{eff}}^4 \ln\frac{m_ {\text{eff}}^2}{c_ 3}
$$

where $c_ 1,c_ 2,c_ 3$ are some $\Lambda$-dependent constants. They are independent of $\phi_ b$ thus in general are not of interests to us. For example, $c_ 2 = \Lambda^2 / 64\pi^2$.

Next we need to add the counter terms to the potential

$$
  V(\phi) = \frac{1}{2}m_ R^2(1+\delta_ m)\phi^2 +\frac{\lambda_ R}{4!}(1+\delta_ \lambda)\phi^4 +\Lambda_ R (1+\delta_ \Lambda),
$$

with all the counter terms starting at 1-loop level, that is of $\mathcal{O}(\lambda_ R)$. $m_ {\text{eff}}^2$ is still defined as $V''$.

What about the renormalization conditions?

- The question we want to ask is how the quantum corrections change the shape of the potential, when the mass term is zero, thus we require $\lambda_ R^2 = 0$
- $V(0) = 0 \implies \Lambda_ R = 0$
- $\lambda_ R = V''''(\phi_ R)$ for some arbitrary fixed scale $\phi_ R$

They will fix the counter terms, plugging them in gives

$$
 \boxed{
  V_ {\text{eff}}(\phi) = \frac{1}{4!}\phi^4\left\{ \lambda_ R + \frac{3 \lambda_ R^2}{32\pi^2}\left[ \ln \left( \frac{\phi^2}{\phi_ R^2}-\frac{25}{6} \right) \right] \right\}
 }
$$

which is known as Coleman-Weinberg potential.

Now having the effective potential at hand, we can answer the question: does the quantum correction change the vacuum expectation value of $\phi$? Originally, without the quantum correction, the minimum of the potential is at $\phi = 0$ since there is no quadratic term and only a quartic term. With quantum correction, the vev of $\phi$ is given by the minimum of the effective potential, which is the Coleman-Weinberg potential, which is minimized when

$$
  \lambda_ R \ln \frac{\left\langle \phi^{2} \right\rangle}{\phi_ R^2} = \frac{11}{3} \lambda_ R  - \frac{32}{3}\pi^2.
$$

which gives a nonzero $\left\langle \phi \right\rangle$. It means now we have a double-well potential, instead of the original single-well potential, due to the quantum correction.
