---
layout: post
title: Haag-Hall-Wightman Theorem 101
date: 2024-12-15
author: Baiyang Zhang
catalog: true
tags:
  - Haag
  - HHW
---

The gist of Haag-Hall-Wightman (HHW) theorem is as follow. Consider a scalar field theory whose fundamental quantum field is $\phi$, the Hamiltonian without interaction is $H_ {0}$ and the full Hamiltonian with interaction is simply $H$. We do not specify the picture yet, so it could be interaction picture, Heisenberg picture or Schrodinger picture. Assume that we can use the same Hilbert space $\mathcal{E}$. In references people usually use $\mathcal{H}$ to denote Hilbert space, but we often preserve it for the Hamiltonian density, so here we follow the notation used by Nino Boccara. Assume the normalized ground state $\left\lvert 0 \right\rangle$ is **unique** (up to a phase). By definition the vacuum state is an eigen state of the free Hamiltonian with eigen value $0$, 

$$
H_ {0} \left\lvert 0 \right\rangle = 0.
$$

This is the bare vacuum. The vacuum should be invariant under Euclidean translations. Once the free Hamiltonian is chosen (sometimes there is more than one way to choose it, for example in the case of sine-Gordon model), we can read off the bare mass of the particle, then use it to define the ladder operators, which in turn defines the normal ordering. 

The ground state of the full Hamiltonian is denoted by $\left\lvert \Omega \right\rangle$, it is the dressed vacuum, or "physical vacuum". $\left\lvert \Omega \right\rangle$ is also Euclidean invariant. Since we have assumed that there is a unique vacuum state in the Hilbert space $\mathcal{E}$, we must have that the dress vacuum and bare vacuum are the same vacuum up to a phase, 

$$
\left\lvert \Omega \right\rangle = e^{ i\theta } \left\lvert 0 \right\rangle.
$$

Assume $H \left\lvert \Omega \right\rangle=0$ and see what happens. The full Hamiltonian can be written as the sum of $H_ {0}$ and $H_ {I}$, where $H_ {I}$
is the interaction part of the Hamiltonian, written in form of self-interaction of the free field $\phi$. Take for example $H_ {I} = \mathcal{N}_ {m,a}\left\lbrace \phi^{4} \right\rbrace$, where in $\mathcal{N}_ {\left\lbrace m,a \right\rbrace}$ represent normal ordering at mass $m$ with respect to the usual ladder operators $a, a^{\dagger}$. We have 

$$
H_ {I}\left\lvert \Omega \right\rangle \propto H_ {I} \left\lvert 0 \right\rangle = \mathcal{N}_ {m,a}\left\lbrace \phi^{4} \right\rbrace \left\lvert 0 \right\rangle =\cdots+(\cdots)a^{\dagger}a^{\dagger}a^{\dagger}a^{\dagger}\left\lvert 0 \right\rangle           \neq 0.
$$


we say the full Hamiltonian "polarizes the vacuum". We arrive at a contradiction: it follows from assumptions that $H\left\lvert \Omega \right\rangle=0$ but for typical interaction Hamiltonians $H\left\lvert \Omega \right\rangle\neq 0$. 

- - -

Roman (1969): ”The most sobering consequence of Haag’s theorem is that the interaction picture of canonical field theory cannot exist unless there are no interactions“. 



